SINDH ACT NO. IX OF 2010
THE SINDH CRIMINAL PROSECUTION SERVICE (CONSTITUTION,
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS) ACT, 20 09

Mahnoor
CONTENTS

Preamble.
Sections.

1. Short title, extent and commencement
2. Definitions
3. Establishment of the Service
4. Constitution
5. Control and Administration
6. Prosecutor General
7. Qualification for the appointment of Prosecutor General
8. Appointments
9. Conduct of prosecution
10. Responsibilities of Police towards Prosecutors
11. Duties of the Prosecutors
12. Establishment of Agency
13. Power to make rules
14. Terms and conditions of service
15. Code of Conduct
16. Indemnity
17. Removal of difficulties
18. Act to over -ride other laws
19. Savings

SINDH ACT NO. IX OF 2010
THE SINDH CRIMINAL PROSECUTION SERVICE (CONSTITUTION,
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS) ACT, 20 09

Mahnoor [30th April, 2010]
An Act to provide for establishment of Criminal Prosecution
Service in Sindh.

WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for establishment of
Criminal Prosecution Service in Sindh.

It is hereby enacted as follows : -
Preamble
CHAPTER -I
PRELIMINARY

1. (1) This Act may be called the Sindh Criminal Prosecution
Service (Constitution, Functions and Powers) Act, 2009.

(2) It extends to the whole of the Sindh.

(3) It shall come into force at once and shall be deemed to
have taken effect on and from 29th October, 2009.
Short title, extent
and commencement
2. (1) In this Act, unless the subject or context otherwise
requires: -

(a) “Code” means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898
(Ordinance V of 1898);

(b) “District” means a district as notified under the provisions
of Sindh Land Revenue Act, 1967;1[“and Judicial
District”]

(c) “First Information Report” means an information recorded
under section 154 of the Code;

(d) “Government” means the Government of Sindh;

(e) “High Court” means the High Court of Sindh;

(f) “Investigation Officer” means an officer of a Law
Enforcement Agency competent under any law, for the
time being in force, to investigate an offence;

(g) “Law Enforcement Agency” includes Sindh Police and
any other agency established under any law, as may be
notified by Government;

(h) “Lower Court” mean and include Criminal Court, Civil Definitions

1 Section 2, in sub -section (1), after the semi colon the words added vide Sindh Act No. II of 2016 dated February 4, 2016.
SINDH ACT NO. IX OF 2010
THE SINDH CRIMINAL PROSECUTION SERVICE (CONSTITUTION,
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS) ACT, 20 09

Mahnoor Court, Banking Court, Special Court and Tribunal;

(i) 1[“members of the service” means and includes
Prosecutors, officers and other staff of the service;”]

(j) “Prescribed” means prescribed by rules;

(k) “Prosecution” means the prosecution of a criminal case;

(l) “Prosecutor” means the Prosecutor General, Additional
Prosecutor General, Deputy Prosecutor General, District
Public Prosecutor, Deputy District Public Prosecutor,
Assistant District Public Prosecutor and a Public
Prosecutor appointed under this Act 2[“or Code”]and
shall be deemed to be the Public Prosecutor under the
Code;

(m) “Prosecutor General” means the Prosecutor General
appointed under Section 6;

(n) “Rules” means rules made under this Act ;

(o) “Service” means Sindh Criminal Prosecution Service ;
and

(p) “Supreme Court” means the Supreme Court of Pakistan.

(2) The words and expressions used herein, but not defined, shall have
the same meaning as are assigned to them in the Code or the 3[“Police Act
1861.”

CHAPTER -II
ESTABLISHMENT, CONSTITUTION AND
ADMINISTRATION OF THE SERVICE

3. Government shall establish and maintain a Service to be called the
Sindh Criminal Prosecution Service.
Establishment of the
Service

4. The Service shall consist of the Prosecutor General, Additional
Prosecutors General, Deputy Prosecutors General, District Public
Prosecutors, Deputy District Public Prosecutors and Assistant Constitution

1 Section 2, in sub-section (1) for clause (i) substituted by Sindh Act No. II of 2016 dated February 4, 2016.
2 Section 2, in sub-section (1) in clause (l) after the word “Act” the word “or Code” inserted by Sindh Act No. II of 2016 dated February 4,
2016.
3 Section 2, in sub-section (2) the words substituted vide Sindh Act No. II of 2016 dated February 4, 2016.

SINDH ACT NO. IX OF 2010
THE SINDH CRIMINAL PROSECUTION SERVICE (CONSTITUTION,
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS) ACT, 20 09

Mahnoor District Public Prosecutors 1[“and any other Public Prosecutor. ”].

2[5. 3[***] (1) Government shall exercise general superintendence
over the Service to ensure achievement of the objectives of
this Act.

(2) The administration of the Service shall vest in
Government.

(3) 4[The Prosecutors and all other members of the
service shall perform their functions under the
control and supervision of the Prosecutor General
and under the general superintendence of
Government. ]

(4) Subject to the 5[sub-section (1) and (2)] , all Prosecutors
within a district shall work under the supervision of the District
Public Prosecutor.

(5) 6[Omitted]
Control and
Administration
6. 7[(1) Government shall appoint a Prosecutor General, on such terms and
conditions, as may be determined by Government.]

(2) The terms and conditions of service of the Prosecutor
General shall not be varied during the term of his office.

(3) 8[The Prosecutor General shall hold office at the pleasure of
Government.]

(4) The Prosecutor General may resign from his post 9[***] by
tendering resignation in writing to Government.

10[****]

(5) The Prosecutor General shall have a right of representation
and audience on behalf of Government in lower Court.

Prosecutor General

1 In Section 4, the words added “ and any other Public Prosecutor” vide Sindh Act No. II of 2016 dated February 4, 2016.
2 In section 5 substituted vide Sindh Act No. II of 2016 dated February 4, 2016.
3 Clauses (1), (2) and (3) of Section 5 substituted by Sindh Act No. I of 2012, vide No. PAS/Legis -B-32/2011 Dated 02-01-2012.
4 Subs by the Sindh Act No vii of 2025 dated. 8th April 2025
5 subs by the ibid
6 Omitted by the ibid
7 Clause (1) of Section 6 substituted by ibid.
8 Sub clause (3) of Section 6 substituted by Sindh Act No. XIV of 2014, vide No.PAS/Legis -B-10/2014 dated 11.6.2014.
9 In Section 6, sub-section (4) the words omitted vide Sindh Act No. II of 2016 dated February 4, 2016.
10 In Section 6, sub-section (5) omitted and section (6) and (7) renumbered as Section (5) and (6) by ibid.
SINDH ACT NO. IX OF 2010
THE SINDH CRIMINAL PROSECUTION SERVICE (CONSTITUTION,
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS) ACT, 20 09

Mahnoor 1[“(6) 2[****]

7. 3[“A person shall not be appointed as Prosecutor General
unless he is a citizen of Pakistan, permanent residence of
Province of Sindh, and is not less than forty five years of age, he
has, for a period of, or for the period aggregating, not less than
ten years, been an Advocate of the High Court.]

Qualification for the
appointment of
Prosecutor General
8 (1) Government may appoint any Prosecutor to conduct criminal cases in the
High Court, Federal Shariat Court and Supreme Court or any other 4[“Special
Court, Tribunal, Lower Court or any other Court”. ]

(2) Government shall appoint a District Public Prosecutor in
each district, who shall be Officer Incharge of the Prosecution in
the district within the meaning of the Code.

(3) All the appointments, except that of the Prosecutor General ,
to various posts in the Service, shall be made through initial
recruitment in the manner, as may be prescribed:

Provided that , after initial recruitment, fifty percent of vacancies
occurring on the post of Additional Prosecutor General, Deputy
Prosecutor General , Assistant Prosecutor General, District Public
Prosecutor and Deputy District Public Prosecutor shall be filled
through promotion.

(4) No direct recruitment shall be made on regular basis to the
posts of District Public Prosecutor, Deputy District Public
Prosecutor, Assistant District Public Prosecutor, Additional
Prosecutor General and Deputy prosecutor General and Assistant
Prosecutor General except on the recommendation of Sindh
Public Service Commission;

Provided that on commencement of this Act, the persons already
performing functions of prosecution on regular basis in the
Province, shall continue as such.

Appointments
CHAPTER -III
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE PROSECUTORS

1 In Section 6, for renumbered sub-section (6) substituted by Sindh Act No. II of 2016 dated February 4, 2016.
2 Omitted by Sindh Act No vii of 2025 Dated ; 8th April 2025
3 Section 7 substituted by Sindh Act No. XIV of 2014, dated 11.06.2014.
4 In Section 8, sub-section (1) the words substituted by vide Sindh Act No. II of 2015 dated February 4, 2016.
SINDH ACT NO. IX OF 2010
THE SINDH CRIMINAL PROSECUTION SERVICE (CONSTITUTION,
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS) ACT, 20 09

Mahnoor 9. (1) The Prosecutors shall be responsible for the conduct of
prosecution on behalf of Government.

1[“(1-A) The Prosecutor General or any Prosecutor authorized by him shall
distribute work to the Prosecutors in the Supreme Court, High Court, Federal
Shariat Court or a Special Court, Tribunal established under any law for the
time being in force. ”.]

(2) A District Public Prosecutor shall distribute work to the
Prosecutors with respect to the lower Court within a district.

(3) A police report under section 173 of the Code, including a
report of cancellation of the First Information Report or a request
for discharge of a suspect or an accused shall be submitted to a
Court through the Prosecutor appointed under this Act.

(4) The Prosecutor shall scrutinize the report or the request
and may –

(a) return the same within three days to the Officer
Incharge of Police Station or Investigation Officer, as
the case may be, if he finds the same to be defective,
for removal of such defects, as may be identified by
him; or

(b) if it is fit for submission, file it before the Court of
competent jurisdiction.

(5) On receipt of an interim police report under section 173
of the Code, the Prosecutor shall –

(a) examine the reasons assigned for the delay in the
completion of investigation and if he considers the
reasons compelling, request the Court for the
postponement of trial and in case investigation is not
completed within reasonable time, request the Court for
commencement of trial; and

(b) in cases where reasons assigned for delay in the
completion of investigation are not compelling, request
the Court for commencement of trial on the basis of the
evidence available on record.
Conduct of
prosecution

1 In Section 9, after sub-section (1) new sub-section (1-A) inserted by Sindh Act No. II of 2015 dated February 4,
2016. .

SINDH ACT NO. IX OF 2010
THE SINDH CRIMINAL PROSECUTION SERVICE (CONSTITUTION,
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS) ACT, 20 09

Mahnoor (6) 1[“(6) The Prosecutor may forward the report under section 173 of the
Code, to the Court and applicability of offences against all or any of the
accused as per facts and circumstances of the case.”. ]

2[“9-A. (1) The Prosecutor General may
issue general guidelines of the
Prosecutors or officers responsible for
investigation for effective and efficient
prosecution.

(2) The Prosecutor General or the District
Public Prosecutor may refer to the authority
competent to initiate disciplinary proceedings
under any law for the time being in force, to
take disciplinary action against any public
servant working in connection with
investigation or prosecution, for any act
committed by him and is prejudicial to the
prosecution.
(3) A Prosecutor may -
(a) exercise all or any of the powers mentioned in section 9;
(b) call for a report within a specified time
from any officer of law enforcing
agency in relation to an investigation;
(c) call for record or any other document
within a specified time from a law
enforcement agency and, if necessary,
from any other Government
department or agency as may be
necessary for the purposes of
prosecution;
(d) perform such functions and exercise such powers as
may be entrusted to him under the Code and any other law
for the time being in force;
(e) withdraw, with the consent of the Court, from
prosecution of any person either generally or in respect
of any one or more of the offences for which he is being
tried, after obtaining prior approval of -
(i) the District Public Prosecutor, where the offence is
punishable upto three years,

1 In Section 9, for sub-section (6) substituted by vide Sindh Act No. II of 2016 dated February 4, 2016.
2 After Section 9, new section “9-A” inserted by ibid.
SINDH ACT NO. IX OF 2010
THE SINDH CRIMINAL PROSECUTION SERVICE (CONSTITUTION,
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS) ACT, 20 09

Mahnoor (ii) the Prosecutor General, where the offence is
punishable up to seven years; and
(iii) Government, in all other offences
and for the offences triable by the
Special Courts and at any stage of
a trial before any trial Court
subordinate to the High Court
before the judgment is passed, the
Prosecutor General or any
Prosecutor specifically authorized
by him, may, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, inform the
Court on behalf of Government
that the Prosecutor shall not
prosecute the accused upon the
charge and thereupon all
proceedings against the accused
shall be stayed and he shall be
dischar ged of and from the same:
Provided that such discharge shall not
amount to an acquittal unless the court
directs otherwise. ”.]

10. (1) An Officer Incharge of a Police Station or the Investigation
Officer shall -

(a) immediately report to the District Public Prosecutor, the
registration of each criminal case by sending a copy of the
First Information Report;

(b) send the police report under section 173 of the Code, to
the concerned Prosecutor within the period prescribed by
law; and

(c) if an investigation is not completed or cannot be
completed within the time provided under the law, record
reasons for the delay and inform the Prosecutor.

(2) An officer Incharge of the Police Station or Investigation
Officer shall, within the time specified by the Prosecutor, comply
with the directions and remove the defects pointed out by the
Prosecutor in a police report under section 173 of the Code,
including report for cancellation of the First Information Report
or request for discharge of an accused or suspect. Responsibilities of
Police towards
Prosecutors
SINDH ACT NO. IX OF 2010
THE SINDH CRIMINAL PROSECUTION SERVICE (CONSTITUTION,
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS) ACT, 20 09

Mahnoor
11. (1) the Prosecutor General shall -

(a) submit an annual report of the Service to Government
within three months of the conclusion of the calendar year
to which the report pertains ;

(b) keep Government informed about the performance of the
Service.

(2) A Prosecutor, working under the supervision of the
Prosecutor General, shall keep the Prosecutor General informed
about the progress of all the cases under his charge.

(3) A Prosecutor, working under the supervision of the District
Public Prosecutor, shall keep the concerned District Public
Prosecutor informed about the progress of all criminal cases
under his charge.

(4) Where a Prosecutor is of the opinion that an application for
enhancement of sentence or a revision should be filed in any case,
he shall refer the matter to the District Public Prosecutor or the
Prosecutor General, who shall take appropriate measures thereon
under the law.

(5) In case of acquittal by a -

(i) Court in a District, the concerned District Public
Prosecutor; and

(ii) Special Court, the concerned Prosecutor, shall report the
details of the case to the Prosecutor General, along with
grounds for appeal and the Prosecutor General may
request Government for preferring an appeal.

(6) A Prosecutor shall maintain an independent file in the
prescribed manner of each case assigned to him for prosecution.

(7) A District Public Prosecutor shall act as a member of the
Criminal Justice Coordination Committee established under
Article 110 of the Order.

(8) A Prosecutor shall –

(a) in all matters, perform his functions and exercise his
powers fairly, honestly, with due diligence, in the public
interest and to uphold justice; Duties of the
Prosecutors
SINDH ACT NO. IX OF 2010
THE SINDH CRIMINAL PROSECUTION SERVICE (CONSTITUTION,
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS) ACT, 20 09

Mahnoor
(b) on receipt of the police report, final or interim, including a
report for cancellation of First Information Report or
request for discharge of an accused, scrutinize the same
and process it under section 9;

(c) make such entries in the record and registers, as may be
prescribed;

(d) 1[“ perform such other duties as may be delegated to him by the
Prosecutor General Sindh under this Act”. ]

CHAPTER -IV
ESTABLISHMENT OF PROCESS SERVING AGENCY

12. (1) Government may establish a Criminal Process Serving Agency
to perform such process serving functions as may be prescribed.

(2) The criteria for appointment and terms and conditions of
service of the members of Criminal Process Serving Agency shall
be such, as may be prescribed.
Establishment of
Agency

CHAPTER -V
MISCELLANEOUS

13. Government may, by notification, in the official gazette make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Power to make rules
14. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules, members of the
Service 2[“except the Prosecutor General ”], including the staff,
shall be appointed and governed under the Sindh Civil Servants’
Act,1973 (Sindh Act No.14 of 1973) and rules made thereunder.
Terms and
conditions of service
15. The Prosecutor General shall, with the prior approval of
Government, issue a code of conduct for the Public Prosecutors.
Code of Conduct
16. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against
a Prosecutor in respect of anything done or attempted to be done
by him in good faith under this Act.

(2) A Prosecutor appointed under this Act shall be deemed to be Indemnity

1 In section 11, sub-section (8) for clause (d) substituted by vide Sindh Act No. II of 2016 dated February 4, 2016
2 In Section 14, the words inserted by Sindh Act No. II of 2016 dated February 4, 2016.
SINDH ACT NO. IX OF 2010
THE SINDH CRIMINAL PROSECUTION SERVICE (CONSTITUTION,
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS) ACT, 20 09

Mahnoor a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Pakistan
Penal Code,1860 (Ordinance XLV of 1860).

17. Government may, by order, provide for the removal of any
difficulty, which may arise in giving effect to the provisions of
this Act.
Removal of
difficulties
18. 1[****]. 2[“The provisions of this Act shall have effect
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force. ”.]
Act to over -ride
other laws
19. All appointments made, actions taken and notifications issued by
Government before the commencement of this Act, with respect
to prosecution of criminal cases, shall be deemed to have been
made, taken and issued under this Act.

Savings

1 Section.18 deleted by Sindh Act No.I of 2012, vide No. PAS/Legis -B-32/2011 Dated 02-01-2012.
2 After Section 17, added a new section “18” by Sindh Act No. II of 2016 dated February 4, 2016.