 
 
 
 
 
 
PROVINCIAL ASSEMBLY OF SINDH  
NOTIFICATION  
KARACHI, THE 30TH APRIL, 2010  
 
NO.PAS/Legis -B-23/2009 - The Sindh Criminal Prosecution Service  (Constitution, 
Functions and Powers) Bill, 2009 having been passed by the Provincial Assembly of Sindh 
on 29th March, 2010 and assented to by the Governor of Sindh on 24th April, 2010 is hereby 
published as an Act of the Legislature of Sindh.  
 
THE  SINDH CRIMINAL PROSECUTION SERVICE (CONSTITUTION,  
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS) ACT, 2009.  
SINDH ACT NO: IX OF 2010  
 
(First published after having received the assent of the Governor of Sindh in the Gazette of 
Sindh (Extra -Ordinary) dated 30th April, 2010 .)  
AN  
ACT  
 
 
to provide for establishment of Criminal Prosecution Service in  
Sindh.  
WHEREAS  it  is  expedient  to  provide  for  establishment  of  Preamble  
Criminal Prosecution Service in Sindh.  
It is hereby enacted as follows : - 
 
 
CHAPTER -I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sindh Criminal Prosecution Service  Short title, extent and  
(Constitution, Functions and Powers) Act, 2009.  commencement  
 
(2) It extends to the whole of the Sindh.  
(3) It shall come into force at once and shall be deemed to have  
taken effect on and from 29th October, 2009.  
2. (1) In this Act, unless the subject or context otherwise requires: - Definitions  
(a) “Code”  means  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  1898  
(Ordinance V of 1898);  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) “District” means a district as notified under the provisions of  
 Sindh Land Revenue Act, 1967 ;  
(c) “First  Information  Report”  means  an  information  recorded  
under section 154 of the Code;  
(d) “Government” means the Government of Sindh;  
(e) “High Court” means the High Court of Sindh;  
(f)  “Investigation Officer”  means an officer of a Law Enforcement  
 Agency competent under any law, for the time being in force, to  
 investigate an offence;  
(g) “Law  Enforcement  Agency”  includes  Sindh  Police  and  any  
 other agency established under any law, as may be notifi ed by  
 Government;  
(h) “Lower Court” mean and include Criminal Court, Civil Court,  
 Banking Court, Special Court and Tribunal;  
(i) “Order” means the Police Order, 2002 (Chief Executive’s Order  
No.22 of 2002);  
(j) “Prescribed” means prescribed by rules;  
(k) “Prosecution” means  the prosecution of a criminal case;  
(l)  “Prosecutor”   means   the   Prosecutor   General,   Additional  
 Prosecutor  General,  Deputy  Prosecutor  General,  Assistant  
 Prosecutor General, District Public Prosecutor, Deputy Dis trict  
 Public Prosecutor, Assistant District Public Prosecutor and a  
 Public Prosecutor appointed under this Act and shall be deemed  
 to be the Public Prosecutor under the Code;  
(m) “Prosecutor General” means the Prosecutor General appointed  
 under Se ction 6;  
(n)  “Rules” means rules made under this Act ;and  
(o) “Service” means Sindh Criminal    Prosecution Service.  
(p) “Supreme Court” means the Supreme Court of Pakistan.  
(2)    The words and expressions used herein, but not defined, shall have  
 the same meaning as are assigned to them in the Code or the Order.  
 
CHAPTER -II  
 
ESTABLISHMENT, CONSTITUTION AND  
ADMINISTRATION OF THE SERVICE  
 
3. Government shall establish and maintain a Service to be called the Sindh  Establishment of the  
Criminal Prosecution Service.  Service  
 
4.      The Service shall consist of the Prosecutor General, Additional  Constitution  
Prosecutors General, Deputy Prosecutors General, Assistant Prosecutor 
General, District Public Prosecutors, Deputy District Public P rosecutors and 
Assistant District Public Prosecutors.  
 
 
 
2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. (1) Government shall exercise general superintendence over the Service  
to ensure achievement of the objectives of this Act.  
(2) The administration of the Service shall vest in Prosecutor General.  
(3) A Public Prosecutor, an Additional Prosecutor General, a Deputy  
Prosecutor  General  and  an  Assistant  Prosecutor  General  shall  
perform their fun ctions under the control and the supervision of  
the  Prosecutor  General  and  general  superintendence  of  the  
Government.  
 
(4) Subject to the sub -clause  (1) and  (2) control of all Prosecutor  
within a District shall work under the supe rvision of the District  
Public Prosecutor.  
6. (1)   Government shall appoint a Prosecutor General, who shall be the  
Head  of  the  Service  on  such terms  and  conditions,  as  may  be  
determined by Government.  
 
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the Prosecutor General shall  
not be varied during the term of his office.  
(3) The  Prosecutor  General  shall  hold  office  for  a  non -extendable  
period of three years.  
(4) The Prosecutor General may resign from his post during the tenure  
of his office by tendering resignation in writing to Government.  
 
(5) Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing and after  
providing  him  an  opportunity  of  being  heard,  remove  the  
Prosecutor General prior to the completion of his tenure, on the  
ground of misconduct or physical infirmity.  
 
(6) The Prosecutor General shall have a right of representation and  
audience on behalf of Government in lower Court, the High Court,  
the Federal Shariat Court and the Supreme Court.  
 
(7) The  Prosecutor  General  may  delegate  any  of  his  powers  and  
functions  to  an  Additional  Prosecutor  General  or  to  a  Deputy  
Prosecutor General or an Assistant Prosecutor General.  
 
7. A person shall not be appointed as Prosecutor General  unles s he is a  
citizen of Pakistan, and is not less than forty five years of age, and - 
(a)   he has, for a period of, or for the periods aggregating, not less  
than ten years, been an Advocate of the High Court; or  
enrolled as an Advocate of the Supreme Court; or  
 
 
 
 
Control and  
Administration  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prosecutor General  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Qualification for the  
appointment of  
Prosecutor General  
 
 
 
 
 
3  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b)   he has , for a period of not less than five years, performed  
 functions of an Additional Prosecutor General and is enrolled  
 as an Advocate of High Court; or  
(c)   he has, for a period of not less than seven years, performed  
 the functions of a District Public Prosecutor or has performed  
 functions of a Prosecutor in Sindh, under any law, for a  
 period of not less than fifteen years, and is enrolled as an  
 Advocate of High Court; or  
(d)   he has, for a period of not less th an five years, performed  
 functions of an Additional Prosecutor General; or  
(e)   he has, for a period of not less than seven years, performed  
 the functions of a District Public Prosecutor or has performed  
 functions of a Prosecutor in Sindh, under an y law, for a  
 period of not less than fifteen years.  
Explanation. - In computing the period during which a person has 
been an Advocate of the High Court or held judicial office, there shall be 
included any period during which he has held judicial office after he became an 
Advocate or, as the case may be, the period during which he has been an 
Advocate after having held judicial office.  
8  (1)  Government may appoint    any Prosecutor to conduct criminal cases  Appointments  
in the High Court, Federal Shariat Court and Supreme Court or any 
other Special Court.  
(2)  Government shall appoint a District Public Prosecutor in each  
district, who shall be Officer Incharge of the Prosecution in the 
district within the meaning of the  Code.  
(3)  All the appointments, except that of the Prosecutor General , to  
various  posts  in  the  Service,  shall  be  made  through  initial 
recruitment in the manner, as may be prescribed:  
Provided that, after initial recruitment, fifty percent of  vacancies 
occurring on the post of Additional Prosecutor General, Deputy 
Prosecutor General, Assistant Prosecutor General, District Public 
Prosecutor and Deputy District Public Prosecutor shall be filled 
through promotion.  
(4)  No direct recruitment shal l be made on regular basis to the posts  
of District Public Prosecutor, Deputy District Public Prosecutor, 
Assistant  District  Public  Prosecutor,  Additional  Prosecutor 
General and Deputy Prosecutor General and Assistant Prosecutor 
General except on the recommendation of Sindh Public Service 
Commission;  
 
 
 
4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Provided that on commencement of this Act, the persons already 
performing  functions  of  prosecution  on  regular  basis  in  the 
Province , shall continue as such.  
 
 
CHAPTER -III  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE PROSECUTORS  
 
9. (1)      The Prosecutors shall be responsible for the conduct of prosecution  
on behalf of Government.  
(2) A District Public Prosecutor shall distribute work to the Prosecutors  
with respect to the lower Court within a district.  
(3) A police report under section 173 of the Code, including a report of  
cancellation of the First Information Report or a request for discharge  
of a suspect or an accused shall be submitted to a Court through the  
Prosecutor appointed under this Act.  
(4) The Prosecutor shall scrutinize the report or the request and may - 
(a) return the same within three days to the Officer Incharge  
of Police Station or Investigation Officer, as the case may  
be, if he finds the same to be defective, for removal of  
such defects, as may be identified by him; or  
(b) if it is fit for submission, file it before the Court of  
competent jurisdiction.  
(5) On receipt of an interim police report under section  173 of the  
Code, the Prosecutor shall - 
 
(a) examine  the  reasons  assigned  for  the  delay  in  the  
completion  of   investigation  and  if  he  considers  the  
reasons   compelling,   request   the   Court   for   the  
postponement of trial and in case investigation is not  
completed within reasonable time, request the Court for  
commencement of trial; and  
 
(b) in  cases  where  reasons  assigned  for  delay  in  the  
completion of investigation are not compelling, request  
the Court for commencement of trial on the basis of the  
evidence available on record.   
Conduct of prosecution  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(6)   Prosecutor may submit to the Court results of his scrutiny in writing  
 as to the available evidence and applicability of offences against all  
 or any of the accused as per facts and circumst ances of the case.  
 
10. (1)    An Officer Incharge of a Police Station or the Investigation  
Officer shall - 
(a) immediately  report  to  the  District  Public  Prosecutor,  the  
registration of each criminal case by sending a copy of the  
First Information Report;  
 
(b) send the police report under section 173 of the Code, to the  
concerned Prosecutor within the period prescribed by law; and  
(c) if an investigation is not completed or cannot be completed  
within the time provided under the law, record reasons for the  
delay and inform the Prosecutor.  
 
(2)    An officer Incharge of the Police Station or Investigation Officer  
shall, within the time sp ecified by the Prosecutor, comply with  
the directions and remove the defects pointed out by the  
Prosecutor in a police report under section 173 of the Code,  
including report for cancellation of the First Information Report  
or request for discharge of an accused or suspect.  
11. (1) the Prosecutor General  shall - 
(a) submit an annual report of the Service to Government        within  
three months of the conclusion of the calendar year to which the  
report pertains ;  
 
(b) keep  G overnment  informed  about  the  performance  of  the  
Service.  
(2) A Prosecutor, working under the supervision of the Prosecutor  
General, shall keep the Prosecutor General informed about the  
progress of all the cases under his charge.  
 
(3) A Prosecutor, working under the supervision of the District Public  
Prosecutor, shall keep the concerned District Public Prosecutor  
informed about the progress of all criminal cases under his charge.  
 
(4)    Where a Prosecutor is of the opinion that an appl ication for  
enhancement of sentence or a revision should be filed in any case, he  
shall refer the matter to the District Public Prosecutor or the  
Prosecutor General, who shall take appropriate measures thereon  
under the law.   
Responsibilities of Police  
towards Prosecutors  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Duties of the  
Prosecutors  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(5) In case of acquittal by a - 
(i) Court in a District, the concerned District Public Prosecutor; and  
(ii) Special Court, the concerned Prosecutor, shall report the details of  
the case to the Prosecutor General, along with grounds for appeal and  
the  Prosecutor  General  may  request  Government  for preferring 
an appeal.  
 
(6)    A Prosecutor shall maintain a n independent file in the prescribed  
 manner of each case assigned to him for prosecution.  
(7)      A District Public Prosecutor shall act as a member of the Criminal  
 Justice Coordination Committee established under Article 110 of the  
 Order.  
 
(8) A Prosecutor shall - 
(a) in all matters, perform his functions and exercise his     powers  
fairly, honestly, with due diligence, in the public interest and to 
uphold justice;  
(b)  on receipt of the police report, final or interim, including a report  
for  cancellation  of  First  Information  Report  or  request  for 
discharge of an accused, scrutinize the same and process it under 
section 9;  
(c)       make such entries in the record and registers, as may be prescribed;  
 
(d) perform such other duties as may be assigned to him under this  
Act by Government.  
 
 
CHAPTER -IV 
ESTABLISHMENT OF PROCESS SERVING AGENCY  
12. (1)   Government may establish a Criminal Process Serving Agency to  
perform such process serving functions as may be prescribed.  
 
(2)   The criteria for appointment and terms and conditions of service  
of the members of Criminal Process Serving Agency shall be  
such, as may be prescribed.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Establishment of Agency  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7  
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER -V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
 
13. Government may, by notification, in the official gazette make rules for  
carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
 
14. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules, members of the  
Service, including the staff, shall be appointed and governed under  
the Sindh Civil Servants’ Act,1973 (Sindh Act No.14 of 1973) and  
rules made thereunder.  
 
15. The Prosecutor General shall, with the prior approval of Government,  
issue a code of conduct for the Public Prosecutors.  
16.  (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against a  
Prosecutor in respect of anything done or attempted to be done by  
him in good faith under this Act.  
 
(2)   A Prosecutor appoint ed under this Act shall be deemed to be a public  
servant within the meaning of section  21 of the Pakistan Penal  
Code,1860 (Ordinance XLV of 1860).  
17. Government may, by order, provide for the removal of any difficulty,  
which may arise in giving effect to  the provisions of this Act.  
18. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything  
contained in any other law for the time being in force.  
 
19. All appointments made, actions taken and notifications issued by  
Government before the commencement of this Act, with respect to  
prosecution of criminal cases, shall be deemed to have been made,  
taken and issued under this Act.   
Power to make rules  
 
 
Terms and conditions of 
service  
 
 
 
Code of Conduct  
 
 
Indemnity  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Removal of difficulties  
 
 
Act to over -ride other  
laws 
 
Savings  
 
 
 
 
BY ORDER OF THE SPEAKER  
PROVINCIAL ASSEMBLY OF SINDH  
 
 
HADI BUX BURIRO  
SECRETARY  
PROVINCIAL ASSEMBLY OF SINDH  
 
 
 
 
8  
 
 
