SINDH ACT NO.II OF 2016  
THE  SINDH CRI MINAL PROSECUTION SERVICE 
(CONSTITUTION, FUNCTIONS  AND POWERS) (AMENDMENT)  ACT, 2015   
 
[04th February 2016]  
 
 
to amend  the Sindh Crimin al Prosecution Service (Consti tution, 
Functions and Powers) Act, 2009.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to  amend the  Sindh Crimin al 
Prosecution Service (Constitution, Functions and Powers) Act, 2009  in 
the m anner hereinafter app earing; Preamble
It is hereby enacted as follows:- 
 
1.     (1)       This  A ct  may be  called  the  Sindh  Crimin al Prosecution 
Service (Consti tution, Functions and Powers) (Amendment)  Act, 2015.  
 
(2)       It shall come into force at onc e. Short title and 
commencement.
2.     In   the   Sindh   Crimin al   Prosecution   Service   (Consti tution, 
Functions and Powers) Act, 2009, h ereinafter referred to as the  said Act, 
in section 2- 
 
(i)        in su b-section (1)- 
 
(a) in  clause  (b),  after  the  semi  colon,  the  words  ―and 
Judici al Distri ct‖ shall be added; 
(b) for clause  (i), the following shall be substitu ted:- 
 
(ii)       in su b-section (2), for the word ―Order‖, the words ―Police 
Act 1861‖ sh all be substituted with. Amendment of Section 
2 of Sindh Act No.IX 
of 2010.
 
3.     In the said Act, in section 4, after the words ―Assistant  Distri ct 
Public Prosecutors‖  the words ―and any other  Public Prosecutor‖  shall 
be added. 
4.     In the said Act, for section 5, the following  shall be substituted:- 
 
―5. (1)    Government shall  exercise general superintendence over 
the Se rvice to ensu re achievement of  the obj ectives of this A ct. 
 
(2)    The  administration  of  the  Service  shall  vest  in  the 
Prosecutor General. 
 
(3)    The Prosecutors  and  all  other  memb ers of the  service 
shall  perform their fun ctions under the  control and supervision of 
the Pros ecutor General. 
 
(4)    Subject to the sub-section (2), all Prosecutors  within a 
Distri ct shall  work under the supervision  of the Distri ct Public 
Prosecutor. 
 
(5)    The Prosecutor General shall  have power to assign work 
and order the transfer and posting  of any of the Prosecutor and 
memb ers of the service.‖. Amendment of Section 
8 of Sindh Act No.IX 
of 2010.
SINDH ACT NO.II OF 2016  
THE  SINDH CRI MINAL PROSECUTION SERVICE 
(CONSTITUTION, FUNCTIONS  AND POWERS) (AMENDMENT)  ACT, 2015   
 
5.         In the said Act, in section 6- 
(i) in sub-section (4), the words ―during the tenure of 
his of fice‖ shall be omitted; 
 
(ii) sub-section (5) shall  be omitted and sub-sections (6) 
and (7) shall  be renumbered as sub-section (5) and 
sub-section (6); 
 
(iii) for renumbe red sub-section (6), the followi ng shall 
be substituted:- 
 
―(6) The Prosecutor General may delegate any of 
his powers or functions to any Prosecutor or officer 
of the Se rvice.‖. Amendment of section 
9 of Sindh Act No.IX 
of 2010.
6.     In the said Act, in section 8, in sub-section (1), for the words ―or 
any  other  Special  Court‖,  the  comma  and  words  ―Special  Court, 
Tribunal,  Lower Cou rt or any other Cou rt‖ shall be substituted.  Amendment of section 
9 of Sindh Act No.IX 
of 2010.
7.     In the said Act, after section 9- 
 Amendment of Section 
6 of Sindh Act No.IX 
of 2010 . 
 
(i) after sub-section (1), the following  new sub-section (1-A) 
 
shall be  inserted:-  
 ―(1-A)   The   Prosecutor   General   or   any   Prosecutor 
authori zed by him shall  distribute  work to the Prosecutors 
in the Supreme Court,  High Court,  Federal Shariat Court  or 
a Special Court,  Tribunal  established  under any law for the 
time b eing in force.  
 
(ii)  
for sub-section (6), the f ollowing  shall be substitu ted:-  
 ―(6) The Prosecutor may forward the report under section 
173 of the Code, to the Court  and applicability of offences 
against all or any of  the accused as per facts and 
circumstances of the  case.‖.  
8.     After section 9, the following  new section 9-A shall be inserted:- 
 
―9-A.   (1)       The    Prosecutor    General    may    issue    general 
guidelines  of the Prosecutors  or officers respons ible for 
investi gation for effective and efficient p rosecution. 
 
(2)     The Prosecutor General or the Distri ct Public 
Prosecutor may refer to the authori ty competent to initiate 
disciplina ry proceedings under any law for the time being in force, 
to take disciplina ry action against any publ ic servant working  in 
connection   with   investigation   or   prosecution,   for   any   act 
committed by him and is p rejudicial to the prosecution. Insertion of  new 
section 9-A of Sindh 
Act No. IX of  2010.
SINDH ACT NO.II OF 2016  
THE  SINDH CRI MINAL PROSECUTION SERVICE 
(CONSTITUTION, FUNCTIONS  AND POWERS) (AMENDMENT)  ACT, 2015   
 
(3)       A Pros ecutor m ay – 
 
(a) exercise all or any of the powers mentioned  in 
section 9;  
 
(b) call for a report within a specified t ime from any 
officer of law enforcing agency in relation  to an 
investi gation; 
 
(c) call for record or any other document  within a 
specified t ime from a law enforcement agency 
and, if necessary, from any other  Government 
department or agency as may be necessary for 
the pu rposes of  prosecution; 
 
(d) p erform   such   functions   and   exercise   such 
powers as may be  entrusted  to him under the 
Code  and any oth er law for the time being in 
force; 
 
(e) withdr aw, with the consent of the Court,  from 
prosecution of any person either generally or in 
respect of any one or more of the offences for 
which he is being tried,  after obtaining p rior 
approval of – 
 
(i) the   Distri ct   Public   Prosecutor,   where 
the o ffence is punishable  upto three years, 
(ii) the Prosecutor General, where the offence 
is punishable up  to seven years; and 
(iii)   Gov ernment, in all other  offences and for 
the offences triable  by the Special Courts 
and at any stage of a trial before any trial 
Court   subordin ate   to   the   Hi gh   Court 
before the ju dgment  is passed, t he 
Prosecutor General or any Prosecutor 
specifically authori zed  by him,  may,  for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, inform 
the Court  on behalf of Government that 
the Prosecutor shall not prosecute t he 
accused upon  the charge and thereupon  all 
proceedings against the accused shall  be 
stayed and he shall  be disch arged of and 
from the same: 
 
Provid ed  that  such  disch arge  shall  not  amount  to  an 
acquittal unless the court directs otherwise.
SINDH ACT NO.II OF 2016  
THE  SINDH CRI MINAL PROSECUTION SERVICE 
(CONSTITUTION, FUNCTIONS  AND POWERS) (AMENDMENT)  ACT, 2015   
9.     In the said Act, in section 11, in sub-section (8), for clause (d), the 
following  shall be substitu ted: – 
 
―(d) perform such other duties as may be delegated to him by the 
Prosecutor General Sindh und er this A ct‖. Amendment of Section 
11 of  Sindh Act No.IX 
of 2010.
10.   In the said Act, in section 14, after the words ―memb er of the 
service‖, the words ―except the Prosecutor General‖ shall be ins erted. Amendment of Section 
14 of  Sindh Act No.IX 
of 2010.
11.   In the said Act, after section 17 the following  new section shall  be 
added:- 
 
―18. Act to over-ride other laws—The p rovisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwi thstan ding anything contain ed in any other  law 
for the ti me being in force.‖. Addition  of section 18 
in Sindh Act No.IX of  
2010.
 
 
